---
layout: post
title: Can ChatGPT Pass an Undergraduate Statistics Class?
date: 2026-05-20
summary: The answer is, unsurprisingly, yes.
categories: statistics teaching ai
---

I recently had the pleasure of TA'ing for Dr. Steve West's undergraduate statistics class PSY 330. It was a great class—very intensive but informative. Throughout the semester, the course covered t-tests, ANOVA, regression (linear/multiple/quadratic), and bootstrapping. As TA, I was tasked with teaching weekly lab sections which covered conducting the analyses in SPSS.

I was also tasked with grading problem sets and exams. Over the course of the semester, I noticed that a few submissions were clearly AI-generated. As TA, my official recommendation to the students in the class was to *not use generative AI for completion of coursework*. In my opinion, it can be more of a crutch than a help when first learning statistical material. Stats is a field where understanding the groundwork of null hypothesis significance testing and knowing how formulae actually work are critical in building knowledge of more advanced statistical material. If AI is used to outsource work on homework assignments, the student is robbing themselves of the practice needed to do well on exams.

In addition, I have always said that blindly trusting AI tools while learning is risky because you don't have the expertise needed to know if they are giving incorrect output. I stand by this assertion, but AI tools have obviously become much more impressive over the last few years. I wanted to put my claim to the test: How accurate is modern ChatGPT for basic statistical work? Can it pass ASU's PSY 330 class on its own?

### Evaluating the machine

After the semester ended, I gave ChatGPT all of the assignments and the four exams given to the students in the course, and graded its output on the same rubric. The model used was GPT-5.5 on the ASU education account. ASU has its own workspace for ChatGPT, so none of the information or files uploaded will be shared with OpenAI or used to train future models of ChatGPT.

When prompting ChatGPT to complete an assignment, I used the following prompt: "Please complete this problem set."

For the first few assignments, it needed additional prompting to generate SPSS code. In order to get it to ouput syntax, I gave it the prompt "Generate syntax for the SPSS portion of the assignment."

The results were interesting. Many times, it gave answers that were almost verbatim from the key. This is unsurprising, because the keys were made by Dr. West 

* many times it gave almost verbatim answers from the key.

* it needed additional prompting to generate SPSS code, sometimes. I used the prompt "Generate syntax for the SPSS portion of the assignment."

* If it needed to see SPSS output to generate answers, I used the prompt : "Using this output, answer the missing problems."

ChatGPT can't natively interact with .sav or .spv files, so it created a workaround by installing python packages to parse and work with the information provided. 

"I'm thinking it might be easier to create my own package to parse numeric values from SPV binary tables."

"I'm thinking that instead of reading table data directly it could be easier to infer values from the binary structure of the file."

"Decoding data from byte sequence." 


seemed to actually get more accurate with more advanced material





-1 -2 -1 Overall score = 4

46/50

* didn't call variation sums of squares, didn't show work, didn't interpret image correctly (thought peak of graph was at 0, not 2)






-3 -2 -2 -2

* didn't give version of null hypotheses presented in class, couldn't interpret spss output, but generated correct syntax





-1 -3 -2

* missed that equal sample sizes were needed for matching, used wrong standard error formula (not the one given in class), gave incorrect interpretation of study, no SPSS interpretation. However, after it thought for 12m 8s, it actually output the correct answers. After this, ChatGPT seemed to learn to parse SPSS files correctly. It no longer needed me to feed the output file back in--it natively generated tables which matched the tables in SPSS. Scary stuff.




Test 1 full credit.



Problem set 4 full credit - hand calculating ANOVA


Problem set 5 full credit - SPSS anova with tukey correction





Test 2 105% - all points and E.C.


problem set 6 full points



problem set 7 missed a few points about missing interpretation from graphs - didn't report lowest/highest values


no points missed on problem set 8






